Rough diagram of how it works... 
From dissertation section 4.2: 
Diagram of System Portrait 16.03.2026 Five markov models are optimised to reproduce text statistically identical to the last two weeks of articles from five newspapers; their outputs read into a random part of the sandpile model by the reconstructed voices of seventeen data-based company leaders. The sandpile model runs on eight feedback loops sent to eight speakers. The gains of the feedback loops are controlled by the number of ‘infected’ cells in a 2D lattice SIR model projected onto the box in which each speaker was placed. The volume currently playing audio going over a threshold triggered new fires in the associated part of the SIR model.

he Markov models reproduce the statistical trace of five media ecosystems, regrowing their language without its meaning: a performance of the reproduction of frozen slices, and an ironic rendering of the news as noise. Similarly, the reconstructed voices performed an ironic reversal of the same kind of reproduction those companies perform on us. Their reading of the re-grown news connects the two, gesturing to manipulative characteristics of news-media. In the sandpile model, this audio acts as grains, standing as representation of the dynamics established in section 4.3: faultlines, economic and power dynamics driven by a manipulative infosphere. The SIR model is contagion, wild fires, information spread, and the dynamics of political sentiment. Its lattice was spatially distributed across physically separate boxes while remaining programmatically adjacent, echoing the contraction of space that rapid communication systems produce, physical proximity irrelevant to the spread of a signal. The series of feedback loops connected in a loop also form a torus. Connected region to region, the work performs an experiment in the interaction of the systems symbolically gestured to. 

The SIR and sandpile models form a feedback loop, higher audio volume triggers more infections to start, and the amount infected in a region increases the audio volume, starting more infections and making it more likely for those grains to collapse, spreading volume and infection to other regions. I initially assumed that this feedback system would be self reinforcing, which it was for very low thresholds for new fires/infections. However, for most values the feedback was regulating. First, the work goes through cycles of large fires followed by lulls while the susceptibility of the SIR model builds up, but after a while the system stabilises. Any time an infection got big enough to increase the feedback to produce a lot of grains in one section, the grains would scatter around the system, quickly burning away susceptible patches before they could grow very large. 

This suggests a parallel with the dynamics of rapid media cycles. A large political or social event generates intense coverage, spreads quickly across a population unready to react,  leaving behind a burned out, temporarily immunised, fragmented landscape. Like wildfire control, frequent fires remove conditions that would allow a sustained movement to build.
